Hard forks and soft forks are pretty similar overall,
but the end result is much different.
In this video, we'll go over what a soft fork is and how it's different from a hard fork.
Then we'll go over an example of a soft fork known as segregated witness.
A soft fork is a small change to the software protocol.
This change makes it said that
the updated version is still compatible with the original software.
The changes made to the software are compatible with the original version.
This differs from a hard fork where the changes are not compatible.
In a soft fork, there's no permanent split in the chain.
There may be a temporary split,
but that's only to allow time for the changes to propagate through the network.
Once everyone has upgraded to the updated protocol,
the updated version of the network will be the only one that exists.
An example of a soft fork is an improvement known as Segwit.
Segwit, short for Segregated Witness,
was a soft fork of Bitcoin meant to increase the amount of space available in each block.
It allows a block to hold more transactions
by removing the signature data from each transaction.
Without this signature data,
each transaction takes up less space which allows more of them to fit in each block,
that's why it's called segregated witness.
It's separating or segregating
the witness which is the signature data from the transaction.
We can use this as a great example to see
the side effects of an update once it gets implemented.
For one, if your wallet doesn't implement Segwit,
you'll still receive transactions from wallets that do.
What you end up with is transactions that you can't validate.
This is why in a soft fork,
you're required to update to the latest version of the protocol.
Also, this update like all soft forks,
is a trade off between both the advantages and disadvantages of implementing it.
Segwit was able to improve the block chains efficiency,
but also open the door for possible new ways to attack the network.
In this case, Bitcoin decided that the benefits of
improving the network outweighed the potential downsides.
So, Segwit was implemented as a soft fork.
To recap, a soft fork differs from a hard fork in a few ways;
rather than being a large update that is not compatible with the original software,
it's a small update that is considered backwards compatible.